PS-8061 Document KMIP implementation (8.0) (#4619)
percona/percona-server: doc/source/security/using-kmip.rst

You should create a global manifest file named ``mysqld.my`` in the installation directory and, optionally, create a local manifest file, also named ``mysqld.my`` in a data directory.

To install a keyring component, you must do the following:

1. Write a manifest in a valid JSON format
2. Write a configuration file

A manifest file indicates which component to load. During startup, the server can read either a global manifest file, or a global manifest file that points to a local manifest file.

The server reads the global manifest file from the installation directory. If the global manifest file points to a local manifest file, the server also reads the local manifest file in the data directory. If the manifest file does not exist, the server does not load the component associated with that file.

> A local manifest file allow loading components for multiple instances of the server. The loading instructions are specific to that data directory. Different server instances can use different keyring components.

Reviewer: "allow loading components" - maybe "allow loading different components"?

Author: Added different.

.. note:: 

    Enable only one keyring plugin or one keyring component at a time for each server instance. Enabling multiple keyring plugins or keyring components or mixing keyring plugins or keyring components is not supported and may result in data loss.

The following is an example of a global manifest file that does not use local manifests:

.. code-block:: json

    {
     "read_local_manifest": false,
     "components": "file:///component_keyring_kmip"
    }

> The following is an example of a global manifest file that points to a local manifest file:

Reviewer: This is a bit misleading, as the second JSON hash is the local manifest.

Maybe change it to "global and local manifest", or separate the local manifest into a different code block?

Author: Separated the local manifest file

.. code-block:: json

    {
     "read_local_manifest": true
    }

    {
     "components": "file:///component_keyring_kmip"
    }

Configure the component by reviewing the component's configuration instructions. The following **JSON** example could be an example either the global configuration file or a local configuration file for the KMIP component. Both files contain the same values.

.. code-block:: json

   {
    "server_addr": "127.0.0.1",
    "server_port": "5696",
    "client_ca": "client_certificate.pem",
    "client_key": "client_key.pem",
    "server_ca": "root_certificate.pem"
   }

You can create a global configuration file or pair a global configuration file with a local configuration file.

> The following is an example of a global configuration file that does not use a local configuration file:

Reviewer: No, this below is still an example for the FILE keyring, not kmip.

Author: Removed section

.. code-block:: json

    {
     "path": "usr/.local/etc/component_keyring_kmip.cnf"",
     "read_only": "true"
    }

You can also create a global configuration file paired with a local configuration file. The following example is a global file paired with a local configuration file:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "read_local_config": true
    }

.. code-block:: json

>     {

Reviewer: Again, this second JSON block is for keyring_file, not for keyring_kmip.

Author: Removed section.

.. _using-kmip:

==========================================================
Using the Key Management Interoperability Protocol (KMIP)
==========================================================

This feature is **technical preview** quality.

> **Percona Server for MySQL** 8.0.27-18 adds support for the `OASIS Key Management Interoperability Protocol (KMIP) <https://docs.oasis-open.org/kmip/kmip-spec/v2.0/os/kmip-spec-v2.0-os.html>`__. This implementation was tested with the `PyKMIP server <https://pykmip.readthedocs.io/en/latest/server.html>`__ and the `HasiCorp Vault Enterprise KMIP Secrets Engine <https://www.vaultproject.io/docs/secrets/kmip>`__.

Reviewer 2: Typo: "Hasicorp" (which is a funny one, because "Hasi" is German for a cute little rabbit :smile: ): 
```suggestion
**Percona Server for MySQL** 8.0.27-18 adds support for the `OASIS Key Management Interoperability Protocol (KMIP) <https://docs.oasis-open.org/kmip/kmip-spec/v2.0/os/kmip-spec-v2.0-os.html>`__. This implementation was tested with the `PyKMIP server <https://pykmip.readthedocs.io/en/latest/server.html>`__ and the `HashiCorp Vault Enterprise KMIP Secrets Engine <https://www.vaultproject.io/docs/secrets/kmip>`__.
```

Reviewer 3: :smile:

Author: Fixed.

.. _using-kmip:

==========================================================
Using the Key Management Interoperability Protocol (KMIP)
==========================================================

This feature is **technical preview** quality.

> **Percona Server for MySQL** 8.0.27-18 adds support for Key Management Interoperability Protocol (KMIP).

Reviewer 2: The full name is "OASIS Key Management Interoperability Protocol" - how about adding a link to the spec? http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/kmip/

Author: Changed the link to
https://docs.oasis-open.org/kmip/kmip-spec/v2.0/os/kmip-spec-v2.0-os.html

> **Percona Server for MySQL** 8.0.27-18 adds support for the `OASIS Key Management Interoperability Protocol (KMIP) <https://docs.oasis-open.org/kmip/kmip-spec/v2.0/os/kmip-spec-v2.0-os.html>`__. This implementation was tested with the `PyKMIP server <https://pykmip.readthedocs.io/en/latest/server.html>`__ and the `HasiCorp Vault KMIP Secrets Engine <https://www.vaultproject.io/docs/secrets/kmip>`__.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Percona Server for MySQL** 8.0.27-18 adds support for the `OASIS Key Management Interoperability Protocol (KMIP) <https://docs.oasis-open.org/kmip/kmip-spec/v2.0/os/kmip-spec-v2.0-os.html>`__. This implementation was tested with the `PyKMIP server <https://pykmip.readthedocs.io/en/latest/server.html>`__ and the `HashiCorp Vault Enterprise KMIP Secrets Engine <https://www.vaultproject.io/docs/secrets/kmip>`__.
```

Author: Added.

* Streamline encryption key management

* Eliminate redundant key management processes

Component installation
--------------------------------------

The KMIP component must be installed with a manifest. A keyring component is not loaded with the ``--early-plugin-load`` option on the server. The server uses a manifest and the component consults its configuration file during initialization. You should only load a keyring component with a manifest file. Do not use the ``INSTALL_COMPONENT`` statement, which loads the keyring components too late in the startup sequence of the server. For example, ``InnoDB`` requires the component, but because the components are registered in the ``mysql.component`` table, this table is loaded after ``InnoDB`` initialization. 

You should create a global manifest file named ``mysqld.my`` in the installation directory and, optionally, create a local manifest file, also named ``mysqld.my`` in a data directory.

To install a keyring component, you must do the following:

1. Write a manifest in a valid JSON format
2. Write a configuration file

> A manifest file indicates which component to load. During startup, the server can read either a global manifest file, or a global manifest file that points to a local manifest file.

Reviewer 4: Remove a comma - manifest file or a global manifest file

Author: Fixed.

The server reads the global manifest file from the installation directory. If the global manifest file points to a local manifest file, the server also reads the local manifest file in the data directory. If the manifest file does not exist, the server does not load the component associated with that file.

> A local manifest file allow loading different components for multiple instances of the server. The loading instructions are specific to that data directory. Different server instances can use different keyring components.

Reviewer 4: A local manifest file ALLOWS loading different components for multiple instances ON the server.

Author: Rewritten.

.. note:: 

    Enable only one keyring plugin or one keyring component at a time for each server instance. Enabling multiple keyring plugins or keyring components or mixing keyring plugins or keyring components is not supported and may result in data loss.

The following is an example of a global manifest file that does not use local manifests:

.. code-block:: json

    {
     "read_local_manifest": false,
     "components": "file:///component_keyring_kmip"
    }

The following is an example of a global manifest file that points to a local manifest file:

.. code-block:: json

    {
     "read_local_manifest": true
    }

The following is an example of a local manifest file:

.. code-block:: json

    {
     "components": "file:///component_keyring_kmip"
    }

> Configure the component by reviewing the component's configuration instructions. The following **JSON** example could be an example either the global configuration file or a local configuration file for the KMIP component. Both files contain the same values.

Reviewer 4: The following **JSON** example could be an example OF either

Author: Rewritten

**Percona Server for MySQL** 8.0.27-18 adds support for Key Management Interoperability Protocol (KMIP).

KMIP enables communication between key management systems and the database server. The protocol can do the following:

* Streamline encryption key management

* Eliminate redundant key management processes

Component installation
--------------------------------------

Only one keyring plugin or one keyring component should be enabled at a time. Enabling multiple keyring plugins or keyring components are not supported and may result in data loss.

.. note::

    At one time, only one keyring component or plugin should be enabled. Multiple components or plugins being enabled at the same time is not supported and may have unexpected results.

Install Component
---------------------------

The KMIP component must be installed. A keyring component is not loaded with the ``--early-plugin-load`` option on the server. The server uses a manifest and the component consults its configuration file during initialization. 

To install a keyring component, you must do the following:

1. Write a manifest in a valid JSON format
2. Write a configuration file

> You should create a global manifest file named ``mysqld.my`` in the installation directory and, optionally, create a local manifest file, also named ``mysqld.my`` in the data directory.

Reviewer: You need these manifests to load the components, but the description below describes the configuration files.

The configuration file for keyring file is called "component_keyring_kmip.cnf" (similarly how it's called component_keyring_file.cnf for keyring file).

Author: Updated.

> This is an example of a local configuration file:

Reviewer: This could also be an example of the global configuration file (if not using a local config), both allow the same values.

The only difference is that the global configuration also allows the "read_local_config" parameter, and if it is true, it will read the local configuration. (in this case, it will ignore anything set in the global config)

Author: Updated.

.. code-block:: json

>    {"server_addr": "127.0.0.1",

Reviewer: Please format this json, similarly to the example below.

Author: Done.

   "server_port": "5696",
   "client_ca": "client_certificate.pem",
   "client_key": "client_key.pem",
   "server_ca": "root_certificate.pem"
   }

To use a global configuration file and a local configuration file pair, a global file example would be:

.. code-block:: json

    {
        "read_local_config": true
    }

The local configuration file example would have this information and created in the data directory:

.. code-block:: json

    {

>         "path":"usr/.local/etc/kmip_configuration_file",

Reviewer: No, this is the configuration file for component_keyring_file. (path is the keyring file location, read only tells it if it should allow writes to the file)

The KMIP local/global configuration is the one earlier.

Author: Not sure which path you are requesting.

Author: Updated.

        "read-only": false
    }

> For more information, see `Keyring Component installation <https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/keyring-component-installation.html>`__ 

Reviewer: This link refers the manifest file setup (the one mentioned earlier: mysqld.my). This IS required to load the component, but it's not the same as we describe here.

In this page we should mention at least the following information:
* a global (and if needed, a local) manifest should be created in the server/data directory, named mysqld.my
* this manifest should contain a parameter named "components" with the value "file:///component_keyring_kmip"
* this manifest, and the config file shown above should be read only to the server process

Author: Updated.

Usage
-------------------------

The certificates used by KMIP may either be self-signed using ``openssl`` or created by a certificate authority.

The KMIP variables are the connection parameters: the host/port of the KMIP server and the certificates used for the SSL communication.

The following is an example of the KMIP configuration:

.. code-block:: text

    [client]
    host=(hostname)
    port=5696
    certfile=(client certificate)
    keyfile=(client key)
    ca_certs=(client certificate authority)

>     ssl_version=PROTOCOL_TLSv1_2

Reviewer: This is a configuration for PyKMIP, it has nothing to do with mysql or this component. The component configuration is the JSON shown earlier.

Author: removed.

Uninstall the component
--------------------------------------

> You can disable and uninstall a component with the same statement. You must have the ``DELETE`` privilege for the ``mysql.component`` table. Executing the statement deletes the row from the table.

Reviewer: From upstream docs linked below: "This statement has no effect for keyring components, which are loaded using a manifest file and cannot be uninstalled. See Section 6.4.4.2, “Keyring Component Installation”."

Keyring components can't be changed dynamically, they have to be declared in the mysqld manifest file.

To uninstall them, you have to stop the server, remove component_keyring_kmip from the manifest file, and restart the server.

Author: Fixed.
